Course Title: Distributed Systems (3 Cr.)
Course Code: CACS352
Year/Semester: III/VI

Class Load: 4 Hrs. / Week (Theory: 3Hrs. Tutorial: 1 Hr.)

Course Description

The course introduces basic knowledge to give an understanding how modern distributed systems
operate. The focus of the course is on distributed algorithms and on practical aspects that should
be considered when designing and implementing real systems. Some topics covered during the
course are causality and logical clocks, synchronization and coordination algorithms, transactions
and replication, and end-to-end system design. In addition, the course explores recent trends
exemplified by current highly available and reliable distributed systems.

Course objectives

The objective of the course is to make familiar with different aspect of the distributed system,

middleware, system level support and different issues in designing distributed algorithms and
finally systems.

Course Contents

Unit 1. Introduction 4Hrs.
    L.1 Characteristics
    1.2 Design Goals
    1.3 Types of Distributed Systems
    1.4 Case Study: The World Wide Web
    


Unit 2. Architecture 4 Hrs.
    2.1 Architectural Styles
    2.2 Middleware organization
    2.3 System Architecture
    2.4 Example Architectures
    


Unit 3. Processes 6 Hrs.
    3.1 Threads
    3.2 Virtualization
    3.3 Clients
    3.4 Servers
    3.5 Code Migration


Unit 4. Communication 5 Hrs.
    4.1 Foundations
    4.2 Remote Procedure Call
    4.3 Message-Oriented Communication
    4.4 Multicast Communication
    4.5 Case Study: Java RMI and MessagePassing Interface (MPI)
    

Unit 5. Naming 5 Hrs.
5.1 Name Identifiers, and Addresses we
5.2 Structured Naming pete’.

5.3 Attribute-based naming
5.4 Case Study: The Global Name
Service
Unit 5. Coordination
6.1 Clock Synchronization
6.2 Logical Clocks
6.3 Mutual Exclusion
6.4 Election Algorithm
6.5 Location System
6.6 Distributed Event Matching
6.7 Gossip-based coordination
Unit 7. Consistency and Replication 5 Hrs.
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Data-centric consistency models
7.3 Client-centric consistency models
7.4 Replica management
7.5 Consistency protocols
7.6 Caching and Replication in Web
Unit 8. Fault Tolerance
8.1 Introduction to fault tolerance
8.2 Process resilience
8.3 Reliable client-server communication
8.4 Reliable group communication
8.5 Distributed commit
8.6 Recovery
Unit 9. Security
9.1 Introduction to security
9.2 Secure channels
9.3 Access control
9.4 Secure naming
9.5 Security Management

7 Hrs.

5 Hrs.

4 Hrs.

Teaching Methods
The teaching faculties are expected to create environment where students can update and

upgrade themselves with the current scenario of computing and information technology
with the help of topics listed in the syllabus. The general teaching pedagogy that can be
followed by teaching faculties for this course includes class lectures, laboratory activity,
group discussions, case studies, guest lectures, research work, project work, assignments
(Theoretical and Practical), and written and verbal examinations.

Evaluation System

Examination Scheme

Internal Assessment | External Assessment Total
40% 60% (3 Hrs.) 100%

References:

Nr

Le)

wm

_ A.S. Tanenbaum, M. VanSteen, “Distributed Systems”, Pearson Education.

George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, Tim Kindberg, “Distributed Systems Concepts and
Design”, Third Edition, Pearson Education.

Mukesh Singhal, “Advanced Concepts in Operating Systems”, McGraw-Hill Series in
Computer Science.

Ajay D. Kshemkalyani, Mukesh Singhal, "Distributed Computing: Principles,
Algorithms, and Systems", Cambridge University Press

Christian Cachin, Rachid Guerraoui, Luis, "Introduction to Reliable and Secure
Distributed Programming”, Springer

