                        CMP 366 Computer Graphics and Image Processing
                                      BCIS, 6th Semester


Course Objectives
    The objective of this course is to provide the knowledge of image processing and pattern
    recognition and apply these concepts in image processing and recognition applications of having
    commercial values in industry and business management.



Course Description
    The course content is mainly focused on developing the sound theoretical foundation of all of the
    digital image processing stages, ranging from creation to acquisition and pre-processing to
    restoration. The course also requires programming assignments for deeper understanding of the
    various stages of image processing and pattern recognition.



Course Outcomes
    Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
         Thorough understanding of theoretical foundation of fundamental Digital Image
          manipulation and processing steps like acquisition; preprocessing; segmentation; Fourier
          domain processing; and
         Skills on exploration and appropriate use of image processing methods / tools for
          business and management applications.



Course Contents
Unit I: Introduction : Digital Image Processing 4 hours
    Digital image representation, Digital image processing: Problems and applications, Elements of
    visual perception, Sampling and quantization, Some basic relationships like Neighbors,
    Connectivity, Distance, Measures between pixels, Visual Perception



Unit II: Image Enhancement in Spatial Domain 4 hours
    Gray Level Transformations, Histogram Processing, Enhancement Using Arithmetic and Logic
    operations, Basics of Spatial Filters, Smoothening and Sharpening Spatial Filters, Combining
    Spatial Enhancement Methods



Unit III: Image Enhancement in the Frequency Domain 5 hours
    Introduction to Fourier Transform and the frequency Domain, Computing and Visualizing the
    2D DFT, Smoothing and Sharpening using Frequency Domain Filters, Hadamard transform,
    Haar transform and Discrete Cosine transform, Fast Fourier Transform



Unit IV: Image Restoration 7 hours
    The Image Degradation / Restoration Process, Noise Model based Restoration, Spatial filtering,
    Periodic Noise Reduction by Frequency Domain Filtering, Inverse filtering, Wiener filtering,
    Geometric Mean Filter




Unit V : Color Processing 5 hours
    Color Fundamentals, Color Models, Pseudocolor based Image Processing, Color
    transformations, Smoothing and Sharpening operations



Unit VI: Image Compression 5 hours
    Coding, Interpixel and Psychovisual Redundancy, Image Compression models, Lossless and
    Lossy Compressions


Unit VII: Morphological Image Processing 5 hours
    Logic Operations involving binary images, Dilation and Erosion, Opening and Closing, The Hitor-Miss Transformation


Unit VIII: Image Segmentation 5 hours
    Detection of Discontinuities, Edge linking and boundary detection, Thresholding, Region Based
    Segmentation


Unit IX: Pattern Recognition 8 hours
    Descriptor concept, Chain codes, Signatures, Shape Numbers, Fourier Descriptors, Patterns and
    pattern classes, Overview of pattern recognition, Neural Network and Image Processing, NN
    based pattern recognition, Decision-Theoretic Pattern Recognition Methods.



Lab and Project Requirement
        This course requires extensive exposure of practical examples with at least 8-12 lab exercises
        with programs consisting most of topics detailed in syllabus content. Semester end, imageprocessing 
        project as a course project (either individual or group (at most 4 students) is a strict
        requirement for this course.


Basic Text
      Gonzalez, R. C., & Woods, R. E. Digital Image Processing. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of
      India.



References
        1. Jain, A. K. Fundamental of Digital Image processing. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India.
        2. Monique, P., & Dekker, M. Fundamentals of Pattern recognition. New York: MIT Press.
        3. James, M. Pattern recognition. BSP Professional Books.




